The Caves The Chaotic Caves
The Caves
The GM has to decide where the caves are on
the map. They might even be scattered about
the countryside in different places. As drawn,
the cave map is wooded with occasional
clearings, but the GM may of course change
that. 
The monsters are trying to avoid leaving tracks
and trails so as to keep their lairs undetected.
Wild animals are few in the general area
around the caves; monsters are hunting them
pretty hard. As the characters get close to an
entrance, they will note it or the guards (if any)
on duty. Perhaps smoke from someone
cooking a meal in the open is seen rising above
the treetops, or is smelled by the PCs in the
breeze.
An adventuring party blundering around
outside the caves, making a lot of noise, should
alert the denizens to their presence; the
monsters will surely come out in force after
dark, if an adventuring party is foolish enough
to camp nearby.
The underground areas are not lit unless
otherwise noted. It is usually dead-silent
underground, making a Thief's ability to Move
Silently handy. Contrast that to when the wind
is blowing outdoors and the sound of the
leaves makes a constant background noise.
Monsters can hear PCs as easily as PCs can
hear monsters, so unless a monster is on guard
duty or hunting, it does not have an increased
chance of surprise versus PCs.
Most ceilings are 10 to 15 feet high, but the GM
should choose heights as desired. In some
places they are obviously higher, and in others
the GM might want to lower them.
Most of the doors to rooms are heavy wooden
doors that open with a simple latch and can be
barred from inside the room.
Steps typically have a 1 to 1 grade, going down
1 foot for each foot of length (so 10 foot long
steps drop 10 feet in elevation).
Exact elevations are not given to avoid fooling
the GM into thinking everything is neat and
orderly. The contour lines are only rough
guidelines for slopes. The region may look flat
on paper, but even the "flat" parts undulate.
Two entrances (or other features) that appear
to be on the same level could differ in
elevation by 10 to 20 feet. The tunnels will
constantly slope up and down.
Impress the irregularity of the ground from the
start to reduce "flat-world" thinking. If
someone starts arguing that part "A" doesn't
work because it looks like it is on the same
level as part "B", just tell them the ground
slopes up or down as needed and get on with
playing.
A. ORC LAIR
These orcs share (along with those at lair B
below) the duty of guarding the local orc
temple from intruders. They are brash and
haughty, prone to cruelty, tricks, and nastiness.
There is a chance (a 1 or 2 on 1d6) per hour (6
turns) that the player characters will
encounter 1d6 orcs moving about.
1d6 Wandering Orcs: AC 14, HD 1, 
#At 1 longsword, Dam 1d8, Mv 30', Sv F1, ML 8, 
XP 25 ea.
HP 4 ☐☐☐☐ 4 ☐☐☐☐
4 ☐☐☐☐ 4 ☐☐☐☐
4 ☐☐☐☐ 4 ☐☐☐☐
1. ENTRANCE: Two orcs usually stand guard
outside this gaping entranceway, leaning on
their spears. Others will be inside the first
chamber, which is their usual bunk room. Each
has 1d6 sp.
6 Orcs: AC 14, HD 1, #At 1 spear, Dam 1d6, 
Mv 30', Sv F1, ML 8, XP 25 ea.
HP 4 ☐☐☐☐ 4 ☐☐☐☐
 4 ☐☐☐☐ 4 ☐☐☐☐
 4 ☐☐☐☐ 4 ☐☐☐☐
2. EMPTY ROOM: The walls and some of the
ceiling of this room collapsed some time ago.
It is currently unfit to live in.
3. COMMON ROOM: These are the quarters of a
number of orcs, with their weapons and gear.
Each has 1d6 sp. Crude furniture is in the
center of the room, and wooden bunks line the
walls. In the back are sacks of food stuffs
20